---
title: Java 11 - Java world is changing
date: 2019-01-04
lang: en
ref: 20190104-java11
summary: My views and experience with Java >=9 in Java EE 8 environment (JAXB, Lombok, modules, WildFly 14, Rewrtie Filter, new Java life cycle)
---
# Java world is changing

## Java >=9 - a small revolution

With introduction of Java 9, the Java ecosystem has seen the biggest changes since J2SE 5.0. Java 9 module system caused incompatibilities in many existing frameworks and libraries. What's the state of the new Java (9-11) today?

### Performance

JVM 9 (10, 11) introduced many changes under the hood. Our internal tests suggest that running old code on new JVM's gives 10-20% performance gain out of the box. It's a good reason to switch to Java 11.

### Where is my JAXB?

As of this writing JAXB API was not a part of either Java SE or Java EE specification. A programmer cannot assume that it will be available out of the box. It has to be declared manually as a dependency in a Maven project.

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>javax.xml.bind</groupId>
    <artifactId>jaxb-api</artifactId>
    <version>2.3.0</version>
    <!-- E. g. in Wildfly 14 environment JAXB is provided. -->
    <scope>provided</scope> 
</dependency>
```

If we need to use JAXB in a runtime environment without available implementation one have to change `<scope>compile</scope>` and add JAXB (reference) implementation.

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.glassfish.jaxb</groupId>
    <artifactId>jaxb-core</artifactId>
    <version>2.3.0</version>
    <scope>runtime</scope>
</dependency>

<dependency>
    <groupId>org.glassfish.jaxb</groupId>
    <artifactId>jaxb-runtime</artifactId>
    <version>2.3.0</version>
    <scope>runtime</scope>
</dependency>
```

### Lombok
From my experience: [Lombok](https://projectlombok.org/) from version 1.18.2 works out of the box with Java 11.

### Modules
The biggest change introduced in Java 9 are modules. This is the main cause why many applications and frameworks stopped working on new Java.

As I write mainly code which runs on Java EE 8 I haven't got an opportunity to use this feature. All my classes in library modules are by definition exportable.

My private view on Java 9 module system is somewhat negative. It solves very small class of problems and at the same time does not solve one of the main problems which programmers face while using libraries: library versioning.

If you worked on a big project which uses several frameworks, it is highly probable you ended up using many version of some of the libraries (e. g. some of Apache Commons). Which one will be used? The one which will be read by class loader first. Will it work correctly? Who knows. Only tests can check it.

In my opinion a great solution for modules with versioning is [JBoss Modules](https://github.com/jboss-modules/jboss-modules). But it's an another story.

## Java 11 and Java EE 8
Wildfly >= 14 - just use it - works great.

### Rewrite filter (OCPsoft URL-Rewriting Framework, known also as PrettyFaces)

My team uses [OCPsoft URL-Rewriting Framework](http://www.ocpsoft.org/rewrite/) in many projects. Unfortunately in version 3.4.2 the rewriting framework is not compatible with Java 9. On github master branch there is a patch which corrects the problem.

## New Java life cycle

### Java SE
Currently Java is developed in half-year life cycle. There is a new Java version very 6 months -- version which contains new API, new features and can be incompatible which older releases in some elements. Every 3 releases there will be one which will have Long Term Support (8, 11, 14 etc.)

I have read that most of big companies decided to support only LTS releases which is understandable and logical. Testing everything every 6 months only to use new Java version is not worth the effort.

At the same time I think there is no reason why programmers shouldn't check their code on non-LTS Java version while developing new code. I can also imagine that some new app or service could want to use some new feature from non-LTS Java and be developed using non-LTS Java to be later deployed on next LTS Java release. But this is a large topic for another post.

### Java EE --> Jakarta EE
Oracle have donated Java EE specification to community and will no longer maintain or develop the specifications. [Jakarta EE](https://jakarta.ee/) project was created under Eclpise Foundation umbrella.

It is hard to tell how will Java EE future look. For now we know that there will be Jakarta EE 8 which will have feature parity with Java EE 8, but with different licensing.

<!--
Copyright 2019 Michał Piotrowski

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-->
